---
GLEP: 27
Title: Portage Management of UIDs/GIDs
Author: Mike Frysinger <vapier@gentoo.org>
Type: Standards Track
Status: Deferred
Version: 1
Created: 2004-05-29
Last-Modified: 2017-10-13
Post-History: 2004-05-29, 2004-07-20
Content-Type: text/x-rst
---


Status
======

This GLEP was approved as-is on 2004-06-14.

Implementation not completed. Marked deferred by GLEP editor Michał Górny
on 2017-10-13.


Abstract
========

The current handling of users and groups in the portage system lacks 
policy and a decent API.  We need an API that is both simple for 
developers and end users.


Motivation
==========

Currently the policy is left up to respective ebuild maintainers to 
choose the username, id, shell settings, etc... and to have them added 
in the right place at the right time in the right way.  When the 
addition of users was found to often times have broken logic, the 
enewuser and enewgroup functions were designed to remove all the 
details.  However, these functions still suffer from some fundamental 
problems.  First, there is no local customization.  Second, maintainers 
still use the functions improperly (binary packages have suffered the 
most thus far).  Third, the functions are not portable across non-linux 
systems and not friendly to cross compiling or other exotic setups.  
There are other reasons, but these listed few are enough to warrant 
change.


Specification
=============


Portage Structure
-----------------


Defining Accounts
'''''''''''''''''


New directories will need to be added to the rsync tree to store the files 
that define the default values for new accounts.  They will be stored on a 
per-profile basis, that way sub-profiles may easily override parent profiles.  
The default location will be the base profile since all other profiles inherit 
from there.

::

	portage/profiles/base/accounts/
	    user/<username>
	    group/<groupname>
	    accounts

The files are named with the respective user/group name since they need 
to be unique in their respective domains.  For example, the file 
detailing the ntp user would be located accounts/user/ntp.  Each 
username file will detail the required information about each user.  
Certain account features that exist on one class of systems (Linux) but 
not on others (\*BSD) can be redefined in their respective subprofiles.  Each 
groupname will follow similar guidelines.  The accounts file will be used to 
describe global account defaults such as the default range of 'valid system' 
ids.  For example, if the UID 123 is already used on a system, but the ntp 
user defaults to '123', we obviously cannot just duplicate it.  So we 
would select the next available UID on the system based upon the range 
defined here.


Local Overrides
'''''''''''''''

Following the tried and true style of custom local portage files being 
found in /etc/portage, this new system will follow the same.  Users can 
setup their own directory hierarchy in /etc/portage/profile/accounts/ that
mimics the heirarchy found in the portage tree.  When portage attempts to add 
a new user, it will first check /etc/portage/profile/accounts/user/<username>.  
If it does not exist, it will simply use the default definition in the 
portage tree.


Developer Interface
-------------------


EUSERS + EGROUPS
''''''''''''''''

Ebuilds that wish to add users or groups to the system must set these 
variables.  They are both space delimited lists that tells portage what 
users/groups must be added to the system before emerging the ebuild.  The 
maintainer of the ebuild can assume the users/groups they have listed 
exist before the functions in the ebuild (pkg_setup, src_install, etc...) 
are ever run.


Defining Accounts
'''''''''''''''''

Any developer is free to add users/groups in their ebuilds provided they 
create the required account definition files.  


User Interface
--------------


users-update
''''''''''''

When this script is run, all the users/groups that have been added by 
portage to the system will be shown along with the packages that have 
added said users/groups.  Here they can delete accounts that are no longer 
required by the currently installed packages (and optionally run a 
script that will try to locate all files on the system that may still be 
owned by the account).


FEATURES=noautoaccts
''''''''''''''''''''

This is for the people who never want portage creating accounts for them.  
When portage needs to add an account to the system but "noautoaccts" is 
in FEATURES, portage will abort with a message instructing the user to 
add the accounts that are listed in EUSERS and EGROUPS.  This is 
obviously a required step before the package will be emerged.


Rationale
=========

Developers no longer have to worry about how to properly add users/groups 
to systems and worry about whether or not their code will work on all 
systems (LDAP vs local shadow vs cross compile vs etc...).  Users can 
easily override the defaults Gentoo has before dictated.  The default 
passwd and group database can once again be trimmed down to the barest of 
accounts.


Backwards Compatibility
=======================

Handled in similar fashion as other portage rollouts.  When using the new 
account system, add a DEPEND for the required version of portage to the 
ebuild.


References
==========

.. [#APIBUG] http://bugs.gentoo.org/show_bug.cgi?id=8634


Copyright
=========

This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0
Unported License.  To view a copy of this license, visit
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/.
