---
GLEP: 71
Title: Require Projects to report to Council Monthly
Author: William L. Thomson Jr. <wlt@o-sinc.com>
Type: Standards Track
Status: Deferred
Version: 1
Created: 2017-01-19
Last-Modified: 2017-10-13
Post-History: 2017-01-19
Content-Type: text/x-rst
---

Status
======

No progress made for over 60 days. Marked deferred by GLEP editor Michał Górny
on 2017-10-13.


Abstract
========

The Council does not seem to be any over all awarness of any project's
activity, status, members, etc. Projects need to report what is going on
within that project to the council on a monthly basis.


Motivation
==========

Presently there is no awarness of any project activity by the council over
all. There is no required or optional reporting done from any project
to the council. The council is likely aware of a projects existence
but not ongoing details. The council should be aware of what is going on
in the various projects, from activity, to members, to leadership changes,
etc.  Not necessarily for oversight but more for awareness of the big picture.
How all projects come together to form Gentoo.


Specification
=============

Each project will be required to provide a summary briefing to the council
each month. This should include at minimum what is going on in the project.
The direction of the project. The current developers associated with the
project. What each developer is working on and their estimated volunteer time
for the upcoming period. The summary should be done by the projects team
leader but can be done by any member and presented to the council. Projects
should also meet once a month to provide such information to other members
of that project for presentation to the council. This should not require allot
of time.

If a project is unable to meet such, maybe it should not be a project. Though
a developer can still work on anything. Once a project is formed, its
activity, status, etc should be made known on a regular basis by the council
members.


Rationale
=========

The council will have a high level overview of development activity occuring
in every project. Council members and others can get a high level overview
of what is going on in Gentoo as a whole. The council could help with
coordination between projects for a cohesive direction. Teams may be working
on similar things or have commont goals. With councils awarness they may be
able to facilitate further cooperation and unity. This may allow the council
to lead the project as a whole in any given direction.


Backwards Compatibility
=======================

N/A


External documentation
======================

N/A


References
==========

N/A


Copyright
=========

This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0
Unported License.  To view a copy of this license, visit
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/.
