---
GLEP: 28
Title: Expiration of inactive GLEPs
Author: Grant Goodyear <g2boojum@gentoo.org>
Type: Informational
Status: Final
Version: 1
Created: 2004-06-02
Last-Modified: 2014-01-17
Post-History: 2004-06-02, 2004-07-20
Content-Type: text/x-rst
---


Status
======

This GLEP was approved on 14-Jun-2004 and marked as final on 1/16/2014.

Abstract
========

To keep inactive GLEPs from lingering in a limbo state, Draft GLEPs that have
been inactive for more than 60 days and Accepted GLEPs that have been
inactive for over six months should be marked "deferred" due to inactivity
(and, presumably, lack of interest).


Motivation
==========

Right now a number of GLEPs have been in "Draft" status for as much as 11
months, with no obvious activity occurring to either submit the GLEP for
approval or to withdraw it as a bad idea.  Similarly, although it has not yet
really been a problem, Accepted GLEPs also have the potential to linger
without any indication that they are moving forward toward being finalized.
Having a "timeout" period for GLEPs should spur GLEP authors to remain active
in either getting support for or finalizing  GLEPs.

Specification
=============


If a Draft GLEP is inactive for more than 60 days or an Accepted GLEP is
inactive for more than six months, then it would be marked as "deferred" on
the main `GLEP page`_.  Inactivity is defined simply as the GLEP author has
not contacted the GLEP editors with either an update or a request to submit
the GLEP for approval (in the case of a Draft GLEP) or a request that the GLEP
be marked final (in the case of an Accepted GLEP).

.. _GLEP page: https://www.gentoo.org/glep/

A GLEP that has been marked "deferred" may be reopened by request of the GLEP
author or a Gentoo manager, as long as that request also includes either an
update or a note submitting the GLEP for approval or finalization.

Rationale
=========

The GLEP editors have better things to do than chase after GLEP authors to
find out how their GLEPs are progressing.  This GLEP should help.


Backwards Compatibility
=======================

Not really an issue here.


Copyright
=========

This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0
Unported License.  To view a copy of this license, visit
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/.
