---
GLEP: 10
Title: Localized Gentoo Sites
Author: Tobias Scherbaum <dertobi123@gentoo.org>,
        Sven Vermeulen <swift@gentoo.org>
Type: Informational
Status: Deferred
Version: 1
Created: 2003-08-04
Last-Modified: 2014-01-15
Post-History: 2003-08-04, 2003-08-22, 2004-03-14, 2004-05-02, 2004-08-22
Content-Type: text/x-rst
---


Status
======

Due to insufficient resources, the doc team is unable to implement
this GLEP at this time.  It has therefore been marked "deferred".

Abstract:
=========

The Gentoo Website [#gentoo]_ is the main source of documentation regarding
Gentoo itself. It hosts all documents that the Gentoo Documentation Project
[#gdp]_ delivers, including all made translations. In addition the website
contains the GWN and its translations and several news items.


Motivation:
===========

Lots of people have shown interest in the localization proposal, and
even the infrastructure team has given positive feedback. However, due
to lack of a good roadmap and proposal this suggestion has never grown
beyond what it is now: a suggestion. Between the first draft of this
proposal and now some communities grown faster than others. Actually it
is obvious that we have big communities (lots of users, lots of
translators) and smaller communities (less users, less translators). If
we speak about localized Gentoo sites we need to find a capable
solution for small and even bigger communities. This leads us to a
point where the lead translator can decide between a small localized
site including necessarily translated documents and only some
additional pages and a bigger variant with lots of translated gdp
documents, translated news and gwn plus additional pages.


Rationale:
==========

The current layout regarding documentation in the CVS is as follows:
  
  [gentoo]/xml/htdocs/doc/en/*
  [gentoo]/xml/htdocs/doc/nl/*
  [gentoo]/xml/htdocs/doc/fr/*

However, there are several other documents (about, policy, etc) in
main/$lang:

  [gentoo]/xml/htdocs/main/en/*
  [gentoo]/xml/htdocs/main/nl/*
  [gentoo]/xml/htdocs/main/fr/*

This structure makes it very difficult for assigning permissions to the
individual translation teams, and even more difficult to really localize
the Gentoo Website. At this very moment, the translation teams can edit
documents of other languages or even the master English documents. English
reviewers and editors can touch documents of languages they possibly don't
even know. Although we do trust every single documentation editor, a better
implementation is advisable. We also can't give access to well-known
but non-dev translators.

We want to restructure the current layout so that the Gentoo Website is
more easily internationalized.


Implementation:
===============

Website Pages:
--------------

The Lead Translator can choose if he wants to maintain a "small" or a
"big" localized site. All localized sites will be accessible on
http://$lang.gentoo.org which will point to [gentoo]xml/htdocs/$lang.
All localized sites must be implemented in GuideXML.

Requirements for "small" localized sites:
.........................................

  - all documents marked as required in our Translators Howto
  - $lang/main/translators.xml, listing of all translators (including
    GWN translators)
  - $lang/main/communities.xml, listing of all community sites available in $lang
  - index.xml "welcome page", listing of available resources on
    $lang.gentoo.org (i.e. links to documentation, translators.xml and
    communities.xml)

Requirements for "big" localized sites:
.......................................
  
  - all documents marked as required in our Translators Howto
  - $lang/main/translators.xml, listing of all translators (including
    GWN translators)
  - $lang/main/communities.xml, listing of all community sites available in $lang
  - translated $lang/main documents
  - translated $lang/news/gwn
  - translated news items ($lang/news) (only translated news items,
    news items on a per-lang basis aren't allowed)


CVS Structure:
--------------

Actual scheme, everything is relative to [gentoo]/xml/htdocs::

  main/en         Contains the main Gentoo Website (about, policy, lists, etc.)
  main/$lang      Contains some translated Website pages
  doc/en          Contains the master English Documentation
  doc/$lang       Contains the translated Documentation
  news            Contains English news items
  news/en/gwn     Contains the master English GWNs
  news/$lang/gwn  Contains translated GWNs
  proj/en         Contains the project Webpages

Proposed scheme, relative to [gentoo]/xml/htdocs::

  $lang/main      Contains some translated Website pages
  $lang/doc       Contains the translated Documentation
  $lang/news      Contains translated news items
  $lang/news/gwn  Contains translated GWNs

Mail:
-----

All mails to www-$lang@gentoo.org should be forwarded to the Lead
Translator and his Follow-Up.


XSL:
----

We need to "hack" our guide.xsl to support something like inserts.xml for the
whole site.



.. [#gentoo] http://www.gentoo.org
.. [#gdp] https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Project:Documentation

