---
GLEP: 43
Title: GLEP File Hosting
Author: Ciaran McCreesh <ciaranm@gentoo.org>
Type: Informational
Status: Final
Version: 1
Created: 2005-11-07
Last-Modified: 2014-01-23
Post-History: 2005-11-07
Content-Type: text/x-rst
---

Abstract
========

This GLEP proposes the creation of a reliable hosting location for data (e.g.
sample code) associated with GLEPs.

Status
======

This GLEP has been approved by the GLEP editor and marked Final on
13 Nov. 2005.

Motivation
==========

Some GLEPs come with non-trivial example files or code which are part of the
specification. There are two methods which have been used to handle this
previously:

* Include the code inline in the GLEP using a code (``::``) segment. This is
  less than ideal for larger code samples as it leads to considerable clutter.
* Place the files on a developer's webspace on ``dev.gentoo.org``. This is not
  particularly reliable -- developers may leave or accidentally restructure
  their webspace, and a GLEP is intended to be a *permanent* specification.

This GLEP proposes that GLEP authors be allowed to make use of the main Gentoo
webserver for hosting content relevant to their GLEP.

.. Important:: The hosting proposed is for files related to the **proposal**
   (e.g. example code which clarifies part of the specification), not a full
   implementation of the proposal.

Specification
=============

Once a GLEP number has been allocated, developers (or the GLEP editors) may
create a directory in CVS named ``glep-xxxx-extras/`` (where ``xxxx`` is the
GLEP's number) under the main GLEP directory. This directory may be used by
files which are part of the proposal.

Any hyperlinks to files inside this directory should use relative paths. This
prevents breakages in the case of directory structure changes.

GLEPs which use this directory may include an 'Example Files' heading with a
list of links to the associated files.

Example
-------

Consider the following GLEP segment, which has been taken from a draft of
GLEP 42 [#glep-42]_:

::

    Example News Item
    '''''''''''''''''

    The following hypothetical news item could be used for an upgrade to the
    ``YourSQL`` database format which breaks forward compatibility. It should be
    named ``2005-11/2005-11-01-yoursql-upgrades.en.txt``.

    ::

        # Lots and lots of lines of example news item

The news item in question is clearly part of the proposal, but including it
inline is messy. Under this proposal, the main GLEP segment would read:

::

    Example News Item
    '''''''''''''''''

    `This hypothetical news item`__ could be used for an upgrade to the
    ``YourSQL`` database format which breaks forward compatibility. It would be
    named ``2005-11/2005-11-01-yoursql-upgrades.en.txt``.

    .. __: glep-0042-extras/example-news-item.txt

The example news item would then be placed in
``glep-0042-extras/example-news-item.txt``\.

Similar changes would be made for the longer example code segments. The GLEP
could also gain a new section along the lines of:

::

    Example Files
    =============

    `example-news-item.txt <glep-0042-extras/example-news-item.txt>`_
        An example news item.
    `news-mailer.bash <glep-0042-extras/news-mailer.bash>`_
        A ``bash`` script which delivers news items via email.

Backwards Compatibility
=======================

Not an issue.

References
==========

.. [#glep-42] GLEP 42: Critical news reporting, Ciaran McCreesh,
   http://www.gentoo.org/proj/en/glep/glep-0042.html

Copyright
=========

This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0
Unported License.  To view a copy of this license, visit
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/.

.. vim: set tw=80 fileencoding=utf-8 spell spelllang=en et :
