GLEP: 5
Title: Extending metadata.xml
Version: $Revision$
Last-Modified: $Date$
Author: Heinrich Wendel <sysop@heinospage.de>,
Status: deferred
Type: Standards Track
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 02-Jul-2003
Post-History: 02-Jul-2003, 11-Nov-2004


Abstract
========

As the latest development in Gentoo and Portage added the metadata.xml file
to each package, which provides information about the package and its
maintainers, this GLEP proposes to extend this format in order to simplify
the .ebuild format.


Status
======

Timed out


Motivation
==========

The metadata.xml [1]_ standard was accepted and it already contains some
information about the packages (longdescription).


Specification
=============

Add the tags <description> <homepage> <license> to the metadata.xml [1]_ and
remove them from the .ebuild files.  All ebuilds and the emerge -S feature
have to be changed to use the new format.


Rationale
=========

The three tags description, homepage and license are mostly the same in all
versions of an ebuild, but they must be added to each version. In order to
simplify the .ebuild format they can be moved to the new metadata.xml [1]_ file.
This would also allow different descriptions for different languages (lang
attribute) and there are no problems when a program changes it license
(restrict attribute).


Backwards Compatibility
=======================

As it will take some time to do the changes on every ebuild, portage should still
support the old format for some time.


Reference Implementation
========================

not yet ...


References
==========

.. [1] Gentoo Herds Project
   [http://www.gentoo.org/proj/en/metastructure/herds/#doc_chap2]

Copyright
=========

This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0
Unported License.  To view a copy of this license, visit
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/.
