---
GLEP: 6
Title: Gentoo Linux monthly bug day
Author: Brian Jackson <iggy@gentoo.org>
Type: Standards Track
Status: Final
Version: 1
Created: 2003-07-02
Last-Modified: 2017-12-27
Post-History: 2003-07-09, 2003-07-28
Content-Type: text/x-rst
---


Credits
=======

I stole this idea from liquidx who probably stole it from one of the many
projects that do something similar.


Abstract
========

Gentoo Linux should have one day a month that is devoted to clearing out bugs,
and accepting new ebuilds from Bugzilla. This one day a month should not
replace a developers normal bug tracking duties. This "bug day" should become
something that involves the user community to make them feel closer to the 
developers.

Motivation
==========

I believe this would help keep the number of bugs in Bugzilla at a lower level.
This would also be a good chance for some user-submitted ebuilds to be committed
that would normally go overlooked. I think this is a good idea. We could turn
this into a big deal for the user community.

Specification
=============

This doesn't require any coding. It just requires one day each month that 
little other than bug closing will happen. I would like to see all developers
participate, but I know it's unlikely that we could get everybody free on the 
same day. The majority of the people that have had an opinion have 
suggested a weekend day. We will have bugday's on a Saturday. Gentoo 
developers can try to get some of the users to help them out. A prize to 
the most successful developer was suggested. This is an idea to keep in
mind for the future. I guess I'm going to be the one coordinating this 
until I get help, but when I do get help in coordinating this we can 
coordinate via IRC if all parties are capable, or email if not. I will
send out a notice telling the details at least one week in advance to the
-dev, -core, and -user mailing lists.

Rationale
=========

GNOME [1]_, Mozilla [2]_, Zope, and other open source projects do something
similar with good success.

References
==========

.. [1] https://wiki.gnome.org/Bugsquad/TriageGuide/FrequentlyAskedQuestions

.. [2] https://wiki.mozilla.org/Bugdays

Copyright
=========

This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0
Unported License.  To view a copy of this license, visit
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/.
