GLEP: 8
Title: Adopt-A-Developer
Version: $Revision$
Last-Modified: $Date$
Author:	Brian Jackson <iggy@gentoo.org>,
        Thomas Cort <tcort@gentoo.org>
Status: Final
Type: Standards Track
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 02-Jul-2003
Post-History: 09-Jul-2003, 4-Apr-2004, 3-Sep-2006

Status
======

Reactivated by tcort, now existing at
http://www.gentoo.org/proj/en/userrel/adopt-a-dev/.
Since the community has bought into it, GLEP editor g2boojum
has marked it as "final".

Credits
=======

I borrowed this idea from a KDE developer name Scott Wheeler who runs a program
called adopt-a-geek [1]_.

Abstract
========

I would like to start a program to bring together Gentoo developers who need 
hardware, and those that have hardware to donate. This project will 
hopefully get developers that need extra hardware in touch with 
companies/individuals with extra hardware that they wish to donate to 
help Gentoo.

Motivation
==========

There are some developers out there that are using very slow hardware, and some 
that have broken equipment that they could put back into use if they 
had one more part. This program will help developers get the most out of 
their existing hardware and fix any systems that may currently be broken.

Specification
=============

This is a pretty low risk proposal for Gentoo Linux since it only affects 
me, and whoever else wishes to help out. This project would keep very 
detailed records of everything that came in and out. We would actually not 
handle any hardware. We would just facilitate connecting hardware with 
needy developers.

Rationale
=========

KDE seems to have had luck with this. I think it would benefit the devs, and 
make Gentoo better as a result. It would also boost morale by letting 
developers know they are appreciated.

References
==========

.. [1] http://devel-home.kde.org/~wheeler/adopt-a-geek/

Copyright
=========

This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0
Unported License.  To view a copy of this license, visit
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/.
